Asia Nitollano (born February 14, 1988) is an American singer, dancer, model and cheerleader. After winning the television series Pussycat Dolls Present: The Search for the Next Doll, Nitollano became a member of the Pussycat Dolls, only to leave a few months later to pursue a solo career. ==Early life== Nitollano was born in Mt. Vernon, New York. She is the daughter of singer Joe Bataan, and has a daughter named Viola Crayola. She is of African American, Puerto Rican and Filipino ancestry. GNP.com "Fil-Am wins Pussycat Doll search." Retrieved June 14, 2007. As a teenager, Nitollano was a dancer for the New York Knicks. In 2007, she became one of the nine finalists on the CW reality television series, Pussycat Dolls Present: The Search for the Next Doll. During the season finale of the show, she was chosen to become the newest member of the group by judges Robin Antin, Ron Fair and Lil' Kim. According to judge and Pussycat Doll founder Robin Antin, while Nitollano wasn't the strongest vocalist of the final three, she was the best all-round performer.About.com . "Asia Wins The Search for the Next Doll." Retrieved April 29, 2007. ==Music career== Nitollano was a member of the Pussycat Dolls for a brief period of time. Nittollano was set to officially join the Dolls in 2007 after the group would finish their world tour and touring with Christina Aguilera.A chat with the new Pussycat Doll In July 2007, the Chicago Sun-Times reported that Nitollano, who was never contractually obligated to join the Pussycat Dolls, had decided to embark on a solo career. According to Dawn Ostroff, head of the CW Network, Nitollano was not fired from the group, but opted to go solo.Reality TV World. "Pussycat Dolls Present' winner Asia Nitollano not joining the Dolls." July 23, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007. Prior to the announcement, Nitollano's position in the group had been questioned for months, since she had never performed with the group (except on the finale of the show) and had been absent from the group's high-profile performances, most notably Live Earth 2007. Later in 2007, she appeared in advertisements for Sean Combs' clothing line Sean Jean Women's collection. She reportedly signed a recording deal with The Inc. Records, but has not released any music. By July 2009, Nitollano had returned to the New York Knicks, as a finalist in the auditions for the 2009–2010 Knicks City Dancers. As of March 2014 her official YouTube channel bio states that she is working on her album but is unsigned. ==References== ==External links== *Asia Nitollano MySpace page Category:1988 births Category:Living people Category:Musicians from Mount Vernon, New York Category:Reality show winners Category:American dance musicians Category:20th-century African-American women singers Category:American musicians of Filipino descent Category:American musicians of Mexican descent Category:American people of Puerto Rican descent Category:American female dancers Category:Dancers from New York (state) Category:American women pop singers Category:National Basketball Association cheerleaders Category:American cheerleaders Category:Hispanic and Latino American female models Category:Filipino people of African-American descent Category:American models of Filipino descent Category:21st-century American women singers Category:21st-century American singers Category:21st-century African-American women singers