Anne's House of Dreams is a novel by Canadian author Lucy Maud Montgomery. It was first published in 1917 by McClelland, Goodchild and Stewart. The novel is from a series of books written primarily for girls and young women, about a girl named Anne Shirley. The books follow the course of Anne's life. It is set principally on Canada's Prince Edward Island, Montgomery's birthplace and home for much of her life. The series has been called classic children's literature, and has been reprinted many times since its original publication. Anne's House of Dreams is book five in the series, and chronicles Anne's early married life, as she and her childhood sweetheart Gilbert Blythe begin to build their life together. ==Plot summary == The book begins with Anne and Gilbert's wedding, which takes place in the Green Gables orchard. After the wedding, they move to their first home together, which Anne calls their "house of dreams". Gilbert finds them a small house on the seashore at Four Winds Point, an area near the village of Glen St. Mary, where he is to take over his uncle's medical practice. In Four Winds, Anne and Gilbert meet many interesting people, such as Captain Jim, a former sailor who is now the keeper of the lighthouse, and Miss Cornelia Bryant, an unmarried woman in her 40s who lives alone in an emerald-green house and deems the Blythes part of "the race that knows Joseph". Anne also meets her new neighbour, Leslie Moore, who lost her beloved brother and her father, and then was forced by her mother to marry the mean-spirited and unscrupulous Dick Moore at age 16. She felt free for a year or so after Dick disappeared on a sea voyage, but Captain Jim happened upon him in Cuba and brought him home, amnesiac, brain-damaged and generally helpless, and now dependent on Leslie like a "big baby". Leslie becomes friends with Anne, but is sometimes bitter towards her because she is so happy and free, when Leslie can never have what Anne does. Anne's former guardian Marilla visits her occasionally and still plays an important role in her life. Marilla is present when Anne gives birth to her first child, Joyce, who dies shortly after birth (as Montgomery's second son did). After the baby's death, Anne and Leslie become closer as Leslie feels that Anne now understands tragedy and pain—as Leslie puts it, her happiness, although still great, is no longer perfect, so there is less of a gulf between them. Later in the story, Leslie rents a room in her house to a writer named Owen Ford, who is the grandson of the former owners of Anne's House of Dreams, the Selwyns. Owen, who is looking to write the Great Canadian Novel, finds the inspiration he was looking for in Captain Jim's shipboard diary, and transforms it into "The Life-Book of Captain Jim". While Owen is finishing the novel, he and Leslie independently realize they have feelings for each other, but both know they cannot do anything about them. Owen leaves the Island and Leslie is even more miserable being trapped in her marriage to Dick. Gilbert examines Dick Moore and suspects that if Dick underwent surgery on his skull, he might recover his faculties. Anne and Miss Cornelia are both opposed to the surgery, fearing that Leslie's life will become infinitely harder if Dick returns to himself, but Gilbert feels obligated to let Leslie know there is a chance for Dick. Leslie consents, and Dick undergoes the surgery in Montreal; when he awakens, he reveals that he is actually Dick's cousin George, who accompanied Dick to Cuba and was with him when Dick died of yellow fever twelve years before. George resembles Dick strongly because their fathers were brothers and their mothers were sisters, and both had the same peculiar eye colouring abnormality (heterochromia) by which Captain Jim recognized "Dick" in Cuba years before. Leslie, abruptly set free by this news, returns home, and considers taking a nursing course to get on with her life. Owen Ford returns to the Island to court Leslie after Miss Cornelia informs him of what has happened, and they become engaged. While this is going on, Anne gives birth to her second child, a healthy son. He is named James Matthew, for Anne's guardian Matthew Cuthbert and for Captain Jim. At the end of the book, Owen Ford's book is published, and Captain Jim dies with a smile on his face after reading his advance copy. Miss Cornelia, thought to be a confirmed spinster, announces that she has decided to marry Marshall Elliott, who may be a Grit but at least is a Presbyterian; she says she could have had him at any time but refused to marry him until he cut his long hair and shaved his long beard off, which he had refused to do for twenty years until the Grits came into power. Finally, Anne, Gilbert, Jem and their housekeeper, Susan Baker, move to the old Morgan house in the Glen, later to be named Ingleside. Anne is greatly saddened to leave the House of Dreams, but knows that the little house is outgrown and Gilbert's work as a doctor requires him to live closer to town. This book introduces Susan Baker, the elderly spinster who is the Blythes' maid-of-all-work. == Characters == Anne Blythe (née Shirley) -- The heroine. She marries Gilbert and moves in with him at the House of Dreams. Gilbert Blythe -- A doctor who marries Anne before they move into the House of Dreams, from which he commutes for work. James "Captain Jim" Boyd -- A former sailor who minds the nearby lighthouse. He loves Leslie Moore like a daughter. Miss Cornelia Bryant -- Anne's neighbor who despises men. Outspoken and independent middle-aged woman, who has strong and deep rooted opinions. Fervent Presbyterian. She has a warm heart and takes care of the well being of the children of the poor families. Excellent cook, industrious sewer and skilled embroiderer. Leslie Moore (née West) -- A quiet member of the town. When she was 16, her mother pressured her to marry an unpleasant man and Leslie acquiesced because her mother was to die soon. Her husband Dick, was a drunken louse who treated everyone poorly until he went on a trip to Cuba and came back with crippling brain damage that reduced him to the capacity of a child. Forced to continue caring for him for more than a decade before the beginning of the novel, Leslie has given up on the ambitions of her childhood and resigned herself to her depressed existence. Leslie is remarkably beautiful with long golden locks well into her knees and very intelligent, but never had the opportunity to study. Owen Ford -- A young writer who rents Leslie Moore's extra room for one summer. Susan Baker -- Anne and Gilbert's housekeeper. Marshall Elliot — A Grit that refused to shave his beard and cut his hair until the Grits became powerful in politics again. He ends up marrying Miss Cornelia, the sweetheart of his youth. James Matthew Blythe — Anne and Gilbert's young son. ==Series== Montgomery continued the story of Anne Shirley in a series of sequels. They are listed in the order of Anne's age in each novel. Lucy Maud Montgomery's books on Anne Shirley # Book Date published Anne Shirley's age 1 Anne of Green Gables 1908 11 --16 2 Anne of Avonlea 1909 16 --18 3 Anne of the Island 1915 18 --22 4 Anne of Windy Poplars 1936 22 --25 5 Anne's House of Dreams 1917 25 --27 6 Anne of Ingleside 1939 34 --40 7 Rainbow Valley 1919 41 8 Rilla of Ingleside 1921 49 -- 53 Related books in which Anne Shirley plays a lesser part # Book Date published Anne Shirley's age -- Chronicles of Avonlea 1912 -- -- Further Chronicles of Avonlea 1920 -- -- The Blythes Are Quoted 2009 -- ==External links== * * * L.M. Montgomery Online Formerly the L.M. Montgomery Research Group, this site includes a blog, extensive lists of primary and secondary materials, detailed information about Montgomery's publishing history, and a filmography of screen adaptations of Montgomery texts. See, in particular, the page about Anne's House of Dreams. * The L.M. Montgomery Literary Society This site includes information about Montgomery's works and life and research from the periodical, The Shining Scroll. Category:Anne of Green Gables books Category:Canadian young adult novels Category:1917 Canadian novels Category:Novels by Lucy Maud Montgomery Category:Novels set in Prince Edward Island Category:McClelland & Stewart books Category:1917 children's books Category:Canadian children's books Category:Canadian children's novels Category:Children's books set in Prince Edward Island