Autistic Pride Day is a pride celebration for autistic people held on 18 June each year. Autistic pride recognises the importance of pride for autistic people and its role in bringing about positive changes in the broader society. Although Autistic Pride Day is 18 June, pride events are often held on the weekend of that year for logistical reasons, but can be held at any time during the year. == Origins == Autistic Pride Day was first celebrated in 2005 by Aspies For Freedom (AFF), who selected 18 June because it was the birthday of the youngest member of the group at that time.Redford, Joseph, "London Autistic Pride 2019", text of speech given at London Autistic Pride in July 2019. AFF modelled the celebration on the gay pride movement. According to Kabie Brook, the co-founder of Autism Rights Group Highland (ARGH), "the most important thing to note about the day is that it is an autistic community event: it originated from and is still led by autistic people ourselves", i.e. it is not a day for other charities or organisations to promote themselves or stifle autistic people. The rainbow infinity symbol is used as the symbol of this day, representing "diversity with infinite variations and infinite possibilities". New Scientist magazine released an article entitled "Autistic and proud" on the first Autistic Pride Day that discussed the idea. Organisations around the world celebrate Autistic Pride Day, with events around the world, to connect with one another through autistic events and demonstrate to allistic people (those not on the autism spectrum) that autistic people are unique individuals who should not be seen as cases for treatment. Autistic pride points out that autistic people have always been an important part of human society. Being autistic is a form of neurodiversity. As with all forms of neurodiversity, most of the challenges autistic people face come from other people's attitudes about autism and a lack of supports and accommodations (ableism), rather than being essential to the autistic condition. For instance, according to Larry Arnold and Gareth Nelson, many autism-related organizations promote feelings of pity for parents, rather than fostering understanding. Autistic activists have contributed to a shift in attitudes away from the notion that autism is a deviation from the norm that must be treated or cured. Autistic self-advocacy organizations, which are led and run by autistic people, are a key force in the movement for autistic acceptance and autistic pride. Joseph Redford, an organiser for Autistic Pride at London's Hyde Park, stated in a speech that the concept of autistic pride is not about a single day or event: thumb|left|Autistic Pride Flag at Pride is a Protest march in July 2021. As autistic pride has continued to develop, autistic advocates have become increasingly professionalised, with Autistic Pride Reading incorporating as a charity in 2018, and holding a pride event which attracted over 700 people.Reading Chronicle, "MBE recipient will give talk at autism event", 1 June 2018. Accessed 17 January 2021.Autistic Pride Reading, "1st Annual Newsletter December 2018", 4 December 2018. Accessed 17 January 2021. Increasingly, in Pride month, media outlets will produce dedicated media coverage of autistic advocates about their journeys and what autistic pride means to them. In 2016, Kat Humble was quoted in the Independent saying: "The time has come for Autistic Pride. Being part of a neurological minority group does not mean that you have a medical condition. Homosexuality used to be regarded as a 'perversion' and was later defined as a psychiatric illness. That has changed and attitudes towards people with minority neurotypes need to change too." During the COVID-19 pandemic, with physical events impossible, autistic advocates collaborated under the Autistic Pride Alliance to create an Autistic Pride Online Celebration which hosted speakers from four continents. Autistic Pride Day 2020 was an eleven-hour marathon that was hosted on YouTube and the event was repeated in 2021. == Past events == There have been a number of Autistic Pride Day events hosted over the years to promote the self-affirmation, identity, dignity and equality of autistic people around the world. Most events happen during the summer months between June and August. List of Autistic Pride events Year Hosted by 2023 Autistic Pride London Joseph Redford & Autistic Empire Bath Spa Autistic Pride AutWell Pic-Nique des Fiertés Autistes (Paris) Réseau CLE Autistes 2022 Autistic Pride London Joseph Redford & Autistic Empire 2021 Autistic Pride Alliance Online Autistic Pride Alliance 2020 Autistic Pride Online Celebration Autistic Pride 2020 2019 Autistic Pride Picnic at London Charlton House (AIM) Autistic Inclusive Meets (AIM) Autistic Pride Eastbourne Eastbourne Asperger's Support Group Fifth Annual Autistic Pride Picnic at London Hyde Park Joseph Redford Autistic Pride Reading Autistic Pride Reading Charity Autistic Pride Brighton Adrie van der Meer ==See also== *Autism rights movement *Autistic Self Advocacy Network (ASAN) – seeks to advance the principles of the disability rights movement in the world of autism. *List of autism-related topics *World Autism Awareness Day == References == ==External links== * * * * Category:Autism activism Category:Unofficial observances Category:Disability observances Category:Disability rights Category:June observances Category:International observances Category:Neurodiversity