Alex Walker (born 31 July 1986, Newport) is a Welsh rugby union player. He is a Wales sevens international. A scrum half, Walker played for Newport HSOB and Newport RFC before joining Newport Gwent Dragons. During the 2008–09 season he spent time on loan to London Welsh. He was released by Newport Gwent Dragons in August 2010 and joined Eastwood Rugby Club in Sydney, Australia. In July 2011 he joined the Scarlets. He was selected in the Wales Sevens squad for 2012-13Wales Sevens Squad After two years at Cardiff Blues, Walker joined London club Ealing Trailfinders Rugby Club, where he was subsequently named as club captain for the 2016-17 Greene King IPA Championship season. After three years with Ealing, in June 2017 it was confirmed that Walker had signed for another London club, London Scottish FC, in a part-time professional playing role. Walker's playing role at London Scottish was combined with a full-time school-teaching one. Walker retired from playing professional rugby by June 2018. In 2018 Alex Walker hoped that teaching may be a vocation that he could continue after his rugby career had finished. He was in his last year of his degree with the Open University and was aiming to complete his PGCE the following year. In 2019, Walker was a trainee teacher/rugby coach at Belmont Mill Hill Preparatory School in London. ==Personal life== Alex Walker also appeared on the Channel 4 residential property search show Location, Location, Location in 2014 (Series 23 Episode 8) and again in early 2016 (Series 26 Episode 6), looking for a home in Ruislip and Hillingdon areas of west London. ==References== ==External links== *Newport Gwent Dragons profile *London Welsh profile Category:Living people Category:Welsh rugby union players Category:Newport HSOB RFC players Category:Dragons RFC players Category:Newport RFC players Category:Cardiff RFC players Category:Scarlets players Category:London Welsh RFC players Category:1986 births Category:Rugby union players from Newport, Wales Category:Rugby union scrum-halves