Artemisia michauxiana is a North American species of wormwood in the sunflower family.Calflora taxon report, University of California, Artemisia michauxiana Bess. Michally sagewort, lemon sagewort It is known by the common names Michaux's wormwood and lemon sagewort. It is native to the western United States and Canada.Biota of North America Program 2014 state-level distribution map It grows in mountain talus habitats in subalpine to alpine climates. Artemisia michauxiana is a rhizomatous perennial herb with green, lemon- scented foliage. The plant grows up to 100 cm (40 inches) tall with several erect branches. The leaves are divided into many narrow segments which are hairless or lightly hairy and bear yellowish resin glands. The inflorescence is a spike up to 15 centimeters long full of clusters of small flower heads. Each head is lined with rough purplish green, glandular phyllaries and generally contains pale pistillate and disc florets. The fruit is a tiny hairless achene.Flora of North America Vol. 19, 20 and 21 Page 530, Lemon sagewort, Artemisia michauxiana Besser in W. J. Hooker, Fl. Bor.-Amer. 1: 324. 1833. ==References== ==External links== *Calflora Database: Artemisia michauxiana (Lemon sagewort, Michally sagewort) *Jepson Manual eFlora (TJM2) treatment of Artemisia michauxiana *University of Washington, Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture *Plants for a Future *Turner Photographics, Wildflowers of the Pacific Northwest *Eastern Washington University, Flora of Eastern Washington and Adjacent Idaho *Paul Slichter, Sageworts, Mugworts and Wormwoods: The Genus Artemisia in the Columbia River Gorge of Oregon and Washington, Lemon Sagewort, Michaux Mugwort Artemisia michauxiana michauxiana Category:Flora of the Northwestern United States Category:Flora of Western Canada Category:Flora of California Category:Flora of Nevada Category:Flora of Utah Category:Flora of the Great Basin Category:Plants described in 1833 Category:Taxa named by Wilibald Swibert Joseph Gottlieb von Besser Category:Flora without expected TNC conservation status