Alfredo Rafael Sosa (Albanian : Rafael Soza; born 7 May 1988) is an Argentine professional footballer who plays as a forward. ==Club career== Malacarne started his career with Argentine giants Estudiantes de La Plata as a teenager. He played mainly for the reserve and youth teams during his time in Argentina. After negotiations with Albanian club Dinamo Tirana, Estudiantes decided to offer the Albanians Rafael Sosa and Nicolas Delmonte on loan until the end of the Albanian Superliga 2009–10 season. ===Dinamo Tirana=== He completed his move to Dinamo Tirana on 26 June 2009. He arrived late from Argentina and completed all the formalities at the 'Dinamo Complex' before training with the rest of the squad for the first time. He became Dinamo's first Argentine signing of the 2009–10 season.Sosa completes Dinamo move He made his competitive debut for the club in the Europa League 2009-10 1st leg tie against FC Lahti. He performed well on his debut which in the end didn't help the club much as they lost 4–1 to the Finnish side. Rafael Sosa came on as a substitute for Serbian striker Mladen Brkic. Along with the 2nd leg in which Rafael Sosa didn't manage feature in, the aggregate score was 4–3 which sent the Albania side crashing out of the Competition. The Argentine made his league debut on the opening day of the season on 23 August 2009 in an away match against newly promoted KS Kastrioti Kruje. Rafael Sosa started the game in midfield and helped his side to a 3–1 win. The most important goal scored by the Argentinian newcomer to the 'blues'of Tirana was that one, and the only one scored in the away match Besa-Dinamo 0–1. This goal let Dinamo stand to the top of classification. The same player scored against the only goal of the home match this time Dinamo-Tirana, so that Dinamo went 15 points ahead Besa, since the 15th fixture.Kastrioti 1–3 Dinamo During his first press conference in Albania Rafael Sosa explained how he was happy with his move to Albania and that although he found it difficult to settle in at a new club which is his first away from Argentina, he would give his 100% for the club. He also stated that he doesn't expect to score many goals, he just wants to play good football for Dinamo for as long as he is there.First Albanian press conference ===Skënderbeu Korçë=== On 19 August he signed for Skënderbeu Korçë. He made 29 appearances and scored 13 goals. He was Skenderbeu's top scorer. ===Laçi=== Sosa returned in Albania in January 2015 to join top flight side Laçi on a contract until the end of the season. He signed the contract on 14th and was given squad number 17. He made his return debut 11 days later in the championship matchday 19 against Partizani Tirana which finished in a 1–1 home draw, with Sosa appearing in the last 15 minutes. Sosa made 10 league appearances until the end of the season, in addition 2 cup matches, as Laçi 5th in championship but won the Albanian Cup. Sosa left the club on 6 June 2015 following the end of the season by terminating the contract by mutual consent. == Honours == ;Dinamo Tirana * Albanian Superliga: 2009–10 ;Skënderbeu Korçë * Albanian Superliga: 2010–11 ;Laçi * Albanian Cup: 2014–15 ==References== Category:1988 births Category:Living people Category:People from Catamarca Province Category:Argentine footballers Category:Men's association football midfielders Category:Men's association football forwards Category:Estudiantes de La Plata footballers Category:Argentine expatriate footballers Category:Expatriate footballers in Albania Category:Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Albania Category:Kategoria Superiore players Category:FK Dinamo Tirana players Category:Flamurtari FC players Category:KF Skënderbeu Korçë players Category:KF Laçi players Category:FC Sheriff Tiraspol players Category:Moldovan Super Liga players Category:Expatriate footballers in Moldova Category:Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Moldova