Adragon De Mello (born October 5, 1976) graduated from the University of California, Santa Cruz with a degree in computational mathematics in 1988, at age 11. At the time, he was the youngest college graduate in U.S. history, a record broken in 1994 by Michael Kearney. His early achievements may have been more due to endless hard work than to inherent intellectual capabilities. ==Education== Adragon was the only child of Cathy Gunn and Agustin Eastwood De Mello (1929–2003). His father had set the goal that his son would become a Nobel Prize laureate by age 16, and he obsessively pushed his son in mathematics and other academic subjects from an early age. For example, when doing math homework, his father insisted that he solve an equation five times, even when he got the correct answer on the first attempt. In 1981, Adragon was accepted into Mensa. He has also been a member of Intertel, another organization for people with high intelligence. Adragon's father claimed that Adragon had a projected IQ of 400, based on a test administered to him at 4 years old. https://www.scienceabc.com/humans/people-who-have-the-highest-iq- in-the-world-html.html However when his father enrolled him in Popper-Keizer, a school for gifted children, standardized tests Adragon took suggested he was around the 85th percentile for students his age, where most students enrolled in such schools where in the 95th percentile. After attending seven different elementary schools in the space of just three years, Adragon enrolled in Cabrillo College for two years starting in 1984. After that, he transferred to UC–Santa Cruz. In 1987, while at university, Adragon and his father were interviewed by Morley Safer on 60 Minutes II. They also appeared on 48 Hours (TV series) and The Tonight Show. While he did graduate from university in 1988, some of his math teachers later claimed that his grades were borderline. After graduating from university and being legally removed from his father's custody, he opted to enroll in Sunnyvale Junior High School (now Sunnyvale Middle School) under the assumed name of James Gunn – James after the fictional spy, James Bond, with his mother's last name. He took all of the classes except math, and played in Little League Baseball. He found it "nice because no one knew who [he] was" and was "upset" when local papers identified him after his graduation. Being outed as a math genius led to social problems. In 1994, he graduated from Homestead High School. Adragon was accepted into a graduate program at the Florida Institute of Technology. == Family == The elder De Mello was a karate master, flamenco guitarist, and former weightlifting champion. He was obsessed with his son's academic achievements and was prone to "scary" fits of anger.Jerome, Richard, Cheakalos, Christina, Horsburgh, Susan, Stambler, Lyndon, Frey, Jennifer, Simmons, Melody (17 February 2003). "Prodigies Grow Up." People, Vol. 59, Issue 6. Sometimes, if his partner or his son did not comply with his demands, the father threatened suicide. In July 1988, the parents separated, and their son was eventually placed in the custody of his mother, Cathy Gunn. His mother alleged psychological abuse from the elder De Mello, saying that he pushed their son too hard and did not permit her to use the telephone or to be present during interviews. On March 15, 2001, the elder De Mello ended up in an armed standoff with Santa Cruz police and was charged of assault with a deadly weapon. The elder De Mello, who had bladder cancer, was released to the custody of his son. The father died on May 30, 2003. == Career == In 2000, De Mello was training to be an estimator for a commercial painting company. ==See also== *Child prodigy ==References== ==External links== *Adragon De Mello articles at Los Angeles Times Category:1976 births Category:Living people Category:University of California, Santa Cruz alumni Category:Mensans