The Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle or Advanced Satellite Launch Vehicle (also known as ASLV) was a small-lift launch vehicle five-stage solid-fuel rocket developed by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to place 150 kg satellites into LEO. This project was started by India during the early 1980s to develop technologies needed for a payload to be placed into a geostationary orbit. Its design was based on Satellite Launch Vehicle. ISRO did not have sufficient funds for both the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle programme and the ASLV programme at the same time and the ASLV programme was terminated after the initial developmental flights. The payloads of ASLV were Stretched Rohini Satellites. ==Vehicle== The ASLV was a five-stage vehicle. Two strap-on boosters acted as a first stage, with the core stage igniting after booster burn out. The payload capacity of the ASLV was approximately to an orbit of with a 47-degree inclination. At liftoff, the ASLV generated of thrust. It was a rocket, measuring in length with a core diameter of . The height to diameter ratio of ASLV was very large which resulted in the vehicle being unstable in flight. This was compounded by the fact that many of the critical events during a launch like the core ignition and the booster separation happened at the Tropopause where the dynamic loads on the launcher was at the maximum. ==History== The ASLV made four launches, of which one was successful, two failed to achieve orbit, and a third achieved a lower than planned orbit which decayed quickly. The type made its maiden flight on 24 March 1987, and its final flight on 4 May 1994. == Launch statistics == Decade-wise summary of ASLV launches: Decade Successful Partial success Failure Total 1980s 0 0 2 2 1990s 1 1 0 2 Total 1 1 2 4 ==Launch history== All four ASLV launches occurred from the ASLV Launch Pad at the Sriharikota Range. For vertically integrated ASLV, many SLV-3 ground facilities were reused but a new launch pad with retractable Mobile Service Structure was constructed within the same launch complex. Flight No. Date / time (UTC) Rocket, Configuration Launch site Payload Payload mass Orbit User Launch outcome D1 24 March 1987 ASLV Satish Dhawan Space Centre SROSS-A D1 First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch First stage failed to ignite after launch D2 13 July 1988 ASLV Satish Dhawan Space Centre SROSS-B D2 Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate Control problems caused launcher to disintegrate D3 20 May 1992 ASLV Satish Dhawan Space Centre SROSS-C D3 Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. Orbit lower than expected and incorrect spin-stabilization. Decayed quickly. D4 5 May 1994 ASLV Satish Dhawan Space Centre SROSS-C2 D4 == See also == *Comparison of orbital launchers families == References == Category:Space programme of India Category:Satish Dhawan Space Centre Category:ISRO space launch vehicles Category:Expendable space launch systems Category:Vehicles introduced in 1987