Alfredo Galán Sotillo (born 5 April 1978) is a Spanish serial killer who killed six people and wounded three from 4 January - 18 March 2003. ==Early life== Alfredo Galán was born in Puertollano, province of Ciudad Real, Castile-La Mancha, Spain. Galán became class president in high school, but was remembered as unremarkable and introverted. In September 1998, he joined the Spanish Army and became a corporal in the 31st Mech Regiment "Asturias" of Madrid and participated in humanitarian missions in Bosnia. He was sent back to Spain to help deal with the clean up of the Prestige oil spill. Galán stole a car and was sent to the Gómez Ulla Military Hospital in Madrid. He was diagnosed with neurosis and anxiety and continued drinking. In March 2003, he began working as a security guard at Madrid–Barajas Airport. ==Murders== On 24 January 2003, Galán shot 50-year-old Juan Francisco Ledesma in the head in front of his 2-year-old son. On 5 February, the body of 28-year-old airport cleaner Juan Carlos Martín Estacio was found shot in the head. An ace of cups was left nearby. On 7 March 2003, 27-year-old Santiago Eduardo Salas was shot in the face by Galán, but survived. Salas's friend, 29-year-old Anahid Castillo Ruperti, was able to escape unharmed. A three of cups was dropped at the scene. It was not originally his intention for playing cards to be his "signature". He only began leaving cards after the media sensationalized the fact that a card had been found by a victim's body. ==Aftermath== On 3 July 2003, Galán surrendered at a police station and confessed to being "The Playing Card Killer." It was reported that in some of the murders, Galán had wished his victims good morning and ordered them to kneel before shooting them. He had smuggled the gun into Spain by hiding it in a television set. He will be released in 2028 after 25 years in prison. ==See also== *List of serial killers by country *Koko (novel) ==References== Category:1978 births Category:2003 murders in Spain Category:21st-century criminals Category:Living people Category:Male serial killers Category:People convicted of murder by Spain Category:People from Puertollano Category:Prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment by Spain Category:Security guards convicted of crimes Category:Spanish people convicted of murder Category:Spanish serial killers Category:Spanish soldiers