Ahmed Isse Awad or Ahmed Eissa Awed (). (), () was born in 1955, Garowe capital city of Puntland, a Somali politician and former diplomat of the Somalia Embassy to the United States of America and the Somali Minister of Foreign Affairs. == Personal life == Ahmed isse Awad was born in Garowe, 1955, Awad hails from Isse Mohamoud sub-clan of Majeerteen, Ahmed Isse Awad is married to Sarah Ashraf, and together they have a daughter. === Education === he flew from Somali Civil War and settling Canada and became citizen and studied at Concordia University in Mount Royal, Canada, then at the University of Khartoum and the Sudanese University of Science and Technology. Appointed Ambassador of Somalia to the United States - Washington in 2015. He has held the position of Minister of Foreign Affairs since January 2018 to November 2020. == Career == Afterward, Awad pursued further education in Africa, obtaining a Master's degree in managing peace and security in Africa from the Addis Ababa Institute for Peace and Security Studies. He gained valuable experience as the chief of staff to Somalia's prime minister, actively participating in the Somali peace talks in Kenya from 2003 to 2004, though unfortunately, these efforts did not yield success. Awad then embarked on a career with the United Nations, dedicating almost a decade to peacekeeping missions in Sudan, serving in locations such as Abyei, Kaduqli, and Darfur. While Awad was a potential candidate for Somalia's prime minister position in 2014, the appointment ultimately went to his predecessor in Washington, Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke. However, in the following year, Awad was entrusted with establishing the Somali embassy. Previously, Somalia's embassy had been abandoned since 1991, and the property was sold by the U.S. State Department, with the funds held in escrow for the Somali government. These funds are now being utilized for renting office space in the capital. He served as Somali minister of foreign affairs till resignation. == References == Category:Living people Category:Puntlanders Category:1955 births Category:People from Garowe Category:Concordia University alumni Category:University of Khartoum alumni Category:Sudan University of Science and Technology alumni Category:Ministers of Foreign Affairs by country