Arikomban (born ) is a wild male Indian elephant from Kerala, India. Arikomban is a victim of the merciless land mafia, who has targeted him for their own vested interests. The elephant is accused of raids on local shops for rice and in the process, damaging houses in Chinnakanal area of Munnar. Forest officials and locals confirm that Arikomban has caused no harm to life and property, other than occasionally raiding ration shops and houses for rice.25 The name Arikomban is a combination of the Malayalam words ari, meaning rice, and komban, meaning tusker. Arikomban is estimated to be born in the late 1980s. He was initially known as Chinnakomban. .Kerala government rehabilitated landless people into '301 colony' which is an elephant corridor. IFS officer Prakriti Srivastava had issued a warning against allowing human settlements in Chinnakanal but it fell on deaf ears. Due to the frequent presence of wild elephants in the area, many people have chosen to leave. Elephants have genetic memories passed down through generations and so in the wild, herd of elephants walk through the same path which is imbibed in their memory, unintentionally trampling over new constructions or obstructions in their path. The resort mafia exploited the situation by offering a sum of 15 lakhs to these people in exchange for acquiring the title deeds to the land. They perceived the presence of elephants as an obstacle to their activities. Then they started spreading false stories against Elephants using tribespeople and plantation workers as tools. A campaign was unleashed through local and social media and Arikomban became their first target .Arikomban was portrayed as a killer elephant. The land mafias then filed a case to have him captured. The paradox is that humans encroached upon his home, destroyed the trees, stole his food, displaced his natural habitat with bricks and cement, and later initiated an accusation against him. The hungry and hapless Arikomban makes the mistake of failing to recognise that his habitat is now a human colony and that he is not allowed to steal food from those human communities. On 29 April 2023, in accordance with the court order, the Kerala wildlife department tranquillized and captured Arikomban from Chinnakanal and released into the Periyar National Park.However the judge elucidated that the conversion of natural grasslands into eucalyptus forests, primarily to cater to human needs, has resulted in the deprivation of food and water sources for elephants and other wildlife. Arikombam, though sedated with multiple shots, fiercely resisted the 150-member team and the four kumki elephants who tried to capture and translocate him. He was not ready to leave his home land. Arikomban now stands as a symbol of resilience in the face of injustice. Arikomban's plight sheds light on the harsh reality of illegal land encroachments which forcibly displaced him from his natural habitat and ultimately led to Arikomban being translocated from his own land21. However, Arikomban's ordeal and forced relocation from his own soil and herd for no fault of his own has awakened Kerala's consciousness and got Arikomban a huge fan base.22 == Early life == Arikomban's tragic story started in December 1984, when the tribals heard loud cries of a baby elephant. Arikomban was found crying next to his mother's lifeless body. He stood there for days trying to wake up his dead mother. He still visits the same spot every year perhaps still mourning the loss of his mother. == History == === First Arikomban mission – failed === In 2017, the Kerala Forest Department tried to capture Arikomban in Chinnakanal. The mission was led by Arun Zachariah along with four veterinarians, 100 forest personnel, and two "Kumkis" (trained elephants) in India. The forest personnel closely watched Arikomban for several days prior to initiating the first Arikomban mission in the upper Anaerangal forest region. Two tranquilizer shots were fired on the first day, but Arikomban managed to evade capture. On the second day of the mission, four tranquilizer shots were fired at Arikomban in a spot adjacent to the Cement Palam, near "Chinnakkanal". However, these shots failed to sedate Arikomban, ultimately leading to the failure of the mission === Second Arikomban mission === The Second Mission proposed by Kerala government in March 2023 initially endured controversy, including animal rights activists opposing the Kerala forest department's move to capture and tame Kumuki elephants at the Kodanad Elephant Center in Ernakulam district. They petitioned the Kerala High Court, which after hearing the petition stopped the department from the move. To investigate the matter, the court appointed an expert committee. The committee recommended moving the elephant to a wilderness region without any possibility of human-human conflict. The Parambikulam Tiger Reserve was the place the committee had advised moving Arikomban. Protests quickly broke out in the Parambikulam neighbourhood as locals vehemently opposed the decision. The Kerala government was then instructed by the High Court to release it in a location of its choosing while keeping the location a mystery. The court then instructed the forest department to follow the elephant, tranquillize it, and then fasten a radio collar around its neck to monitor its activities. The government subsequently launched a big operation and started looking for alternate areas to relocate the elephant. Arun Zachariah, a wildlife veterinarian, was in charge of the mission. 150 people from the police, health, and motor vehicles departments as well as the rescue services assisted in the mission. A tranquillized Arikomban was herded into a truck using four kumki elephants and sent to the Periyar Tiger Reserve on 29 April 2023 following a two-day operation. The Kerala government spent an astronomical 80 lakhs for the above operation. Over the past four years, the government has allocated a staggering 3 crores towards the capture and training of elephants. However, still numerous human lives are lost in human-animal conflicts and added to it is the agony and pain of a highly emotional and magnificent animal being caught in a lifetime of captivity or forced relocation from its natural habitat and family. The High Court observed that relocating the 301 colony residents and opening up the elephant corridors is a better solution. Definitely, the cost of relocating the 301 colony residents and converting back the encroached forest lands into grassland for the Elephants would be much less than what was actually spent. Just because he is not a human but a voiceless Elephant who has none to support, we invaded his home tranquilized him with multiple shots and relocated him forcefully to an unknown forest away from his home and family. His resistance and cries would melt any human's heart. Tribals in Chinnakanal staged protests demanding to bring back Arikomban to Chinnakanal . === Third Arikomban mission === After being released into the forest, Arikomban embarked on a determined journey in search of his home and family. Covering a distance of 30 to 40 kilometers each day, he eventually reached Meghamalai in Tamil Nadu. However, realizing that this was not the right direction to reunite with his loved ones, he turned back towards Chinnakanal. Along his path, he unexpectedly found himself entering the town of Cumbum. Arikomban has become a media sensation by then and people could recognize him. A YouTuber flew a drone to capture his movements. Scared of the sound of the drone Arikomban started running in panic. People too started fleeing in panic and one of them got critically injured and later succumbed to the injuries. With this, the Tamil Nadu government decided to capture and release him to another forest. Within 37 days Arikomban was given tranquilizer shots again and captured. He was transported to Kalakad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve standing in the scorching sun for 24 hours and was given multiple tranquilizer shots on the way. ==In popular culture== A Malayalam feature film depicting the life of Arikomban is under development. ==See also== * List of individual elephants * Elephants in Kerala culture * Padayappa ==References== Category:Individual elephants Category:Elephants in Indian culture Category:Individual animals in India Category:Elephants in Kerala Category:1980s animal births Category:Individual wild animals